in the home of Bill Anderson in Corpus Christi.
Bill is the former director of planning in Corpus
Christi. And with that, I'd like to turn it over to
Bill, and he will tell us about the history of
planning in Corpus Christi. I think the
appropriate place to start is with the early
promotion of the city. And it was speculative. It
was done by a man by the name of Ropes that came from
New York. He had great visions that this would be
the Venice of the United States, Venice of the Gulf
Coast. He spent a great deal of money digging a
channel. He built a big hotel. He laid out a large
subdivision that fixed the pattern of the streets
up to this time for a large portion of the city. And
in general, it was a very good plan.
During the Depression in 1908 or thereabout, it
failed. And for a long time, the city was only a
resort center. And in 1926, A ship channel was
built, and a harbor was located here, which
assured the industrial development of the area.
And about the same time, oil was discovered and
gas. And shortly after, several industrial
plants were built that were based largely on the
availability of cheap natural gas.
The next big event that took, well, during the
Depression,
the state planning officer, Major Wood, visited
Corpus Christi and encouraged the city to, this
was in 1935 or thereabouts, encouraged the city to
enact a zoning ordinance and a subdivision
ordinance. And to do so, encouraged the
formation of an informal planning commission,
citizens commission. He loaned and gave some
assistance to the citizens commission. And they
formulated a
zoning ordinance. Now, this zoning ordinance was
a good thing, but it was not based on scientific
analysis of the problems or land use. There was no
comprehensive plan. There was no comprehensive
plan. And there was no comprehensive study of land
use. These citizens, who were very highly
respected citizens on the Planning Commission
and knew the city pretty well at that time, used
their best judgment in laying out the zoning
districts.
Shortly after, they enacted a subdivision
ordinance.
Along about this time, the National Resources
Planning Board offered the city a study called a
sketch plan.
And I don't know exactly how it got started, but
there were several architects, most of them
graduates of Texas A&M.
One of the leaders was Richard Colley. How does he
spell that name? C-O-L-L-E-Y.
a very capable and competent architect. And there
were some other architects involved. And Sam
Zisman evidently was an advisor to this group.
They got together and had some citizens'
committees. And they made some very rough
sketches that kind of designated areas. suitable
for various purposes, sketchy type drawings.
Nothing really came of this, but it did serve to
stimulate some interest among the citizens of the
city.
I don't believe many of the top leaders got
involved. But there were quite a few citizens that
were in it.
League of Women Voters, and Garden Club people,
and architects,
and other groups.
Sam Zussman was assigned here out of the National?
I think he was. I think he was signed here. And Bob
Mitchell from the National Resources Board, I
think, was here one time. But I think Zisman was
kind of the guidance to the local people. And
nothing came, really, of this sketch plan. Is that
the Robert Mitchell that taught at the University
of Pennsylvania? Yeah. I studied him. He was a
fraternity brother of mine at University of
Illinois Alpha Rho Chi. Really? I studied under
him at Penn. Yeah, I was now for up there in
Illinois. Well, as I said, nothing really came
specific from this sketch plan, except it served a
good educational media, which I think was one of
the purposes that it had. Well, as I understand it,
this was one of the first federal attempts at what
might be called a demonstration, a national
demonstration. Yeah, this was selected as one of
the cities for the demonstration. There weren't
many. No, there were only five or six, I think. I
believe so, during the Depression era. Yeah,
there were only five or six of them. And this was one
of them. And I think it was very worth, I think it was
worthwhile.
Now, the next important. It was the only one in
Texas. Yeah. The only one in Texas. I think the
next,
well, along about 19,
oh, long about this time, 38 or 39, the government
decided to establish a naval air training station
here in Corpus Christi. And they bought a large
tract of land
south of the city and built a naval training
station, a naval air training station. And it
eventually became one of the largest ones in the
country, or one of the largest in the world. They
had flying boats, and they had a propeller
aircraft, and they had a lot of auxiliary fields.
Also, at Ward Island, which is a little isolated
tract of land south of the city, they had a radar
training station, which was a super secret
installation. People in the town didn't really
know what it was, but there were a lot of people
assigned here, and there was a lot of A lot of
civilian employees and a lot of naval employees
here. And the city grew. But there was very poor
housing, and they couldn't. They had to resort to
the old tourist courts for the people that
accompanied the military and civilians. And it
resulted in a lot of slummy property,
particularly on Corpus Christi Beach.
Right at the end of the war, then, a political event
took place, which was very significant. Prior to
this time, the city had a commission form of
government, and it was a very poor one. Inherited
from Galveston, I have no doubt. Well, I don't know
how long they had it, but they had it for some time,
and it was...
a very unwholesome thing, particularly with the
high proportion of Mexican-Americans we had. The
commissioners
used their position to control the votes of the
Mexican-Americans. And the Mexican-Americans
at that time were a very uneducated group. They
were primarily cotton pickers. They lived in a
section of the city that was a very slum section
west of the city, where a good deal of it was outside
the city. No sewers, no water, no drainage. It was
just a horrible situation. We had a Negro section
that was pretty well segregated over on the north
side. And this contained a great deal of
substandard housing. and segregated schools.
At this time, a group of citizens, realizing that
Corpus Christi was on the go and would continue to
grow because
of the oil activity and increasing industrial
activity that was caused by the ship channel, that
this city was destined to grow and grow fast. The
leading citizens got together. They were heads of
the industries, and they were all top-notch
people. And they represented what later became
called the power structure.
They established
the city manager form of government in the city
through the leadership of this group. Then
they got some of these people to serve on the city
council, one of which was Robert Wilson, the
brother of Charles E. Wilson, who was president of
General Motors. And people of that caliber were on
the city council,
bankers.
Also, one of the leading oil men in the city was made
president of the Chamber of Commerce, Guy Warren.
And together, they conceived the idea of a
citizen's group called the Area Development
Committee.
And on this Area Development Committee, they had
some 30
people, 25
people, that were all leaders, that were top
owners of the businesses, the biggest
businesses. They were
presidents of the banks,
managers of the industries, top oil men that owned
their companies. And there was around 25 of them.
And they conceived this idea of a citizens
committee to guide the growth and development of
the city.
They realized that they were... About what year
was that? This was in about 1945. Right after the
war. Right after the war. About 1945.
And 46. Well, they realized that...
They were businessmen, and they didn't know
anything about the mechanics of government and
the details of government. And they would need
some help. So they formed a second committee
called a coordination committee. And on that
committee, they had all the political leaders,
like the county judge, the mayor, the
superintendent of schools, and the district
engineer of the highway department, and others,
including the director of the Chamber of
Commerce, or the executive director. And they had
the president of the Citizens Council, the Nueces
Navigation District, Water Supply District, and
all of the political leaders. Well, these were the
ones that were asked to do something about the
guiding of the growth of the city. In turn, this
group got together and decided that they needed
some technical assistance. So they then
appointed what was known as a subcommittee. And on
this subcommittee, they had one, two, three,
four, five engineers.
two lawyers
and the Secretary of the Chamber of Commerce.
They gave this group an assignment. They said, now
here's what we want to do, now you tell us how to do
it.
So this group got together and they wrote to ASPO,
American Institute of Planners, American
Society of Civil Engineers, and a number of other
groups, United States Chamber of Commerce, and
told them what we wanted to do and asked them to tell
us who could do it and tell us some names, give us
some names of people. So we got all these names, and
we got suggestions of how to go about it. So the next
thing was to interview these people. So we had 14 of
the top firms in the United States. come to Corpus
Christi and look the situation over and tell us how
they would approach the problem or what they
thought ought to be in a plan. Was
there any money put up for this effort? Well, I'll
get to that. I think most of the consultants came in
here at their own expense. Up to this time, there
was very little money in it. Now,
this committee reported back through channels
what we needed and what
suggested a program. And we told them it was going
to cost them some money.
Now, this committee, the Area Development
Committee, decided to assess their members. And
they assessed their members at the rate, each
time, about $1,000 apiece. And they could afford
it because they were the power structure and
leading citizens. And after
interviewing all these people, the firm that
stood out the most was the firm of Harlan
Bartholomew and Associates. They seemed to have
the most practical approach and the one that
seemed to satisfy the members of the committee the
most. had placed me in an awkward position because
prior to coming to Corpus Christi, I had been
employed by that firm. I asked to be declared
ineligible to participate because of my
connection.
But the rest of the committee went on, and they did
select the Bartholomew firm. Well, Bill, when did
you get to Corpus Christi? I came in 1946 with the
reform government. Now, I was the second city
planner. They had a city council prior to Robert
Wilson that was not acceptable, and they were
recalled. But they had employed a building
inspector Austin as their planner. And he was only
here for about
nine months. And with the
recall movement. You don't remember his name.
Yeah, I do. I'll think of it in a minute. OK. With the
recall movement, he didn't want to stay on with the
city government. He thought that if the city
government was that bad, he didn't want to be on it,
on the staff. So he resigned. So then when the new
city council, Robert Wilson, came in, they went
about contacting ASPO and American Society of
Civil Engineers and other people. United States
Chamber of Commerce for suggestions for a
planner. I was one of three that was interviewed.
They paid my expenses down here from New Jersey.
You were living in New Jersey then? I was living in
Newark working on a comprehensive plan with for
the city of Newark was Bartholomew. Ah, yes.
That's where he started his practice, was in
Newark. Yeah, and I have a copy of their first
comprehensive plan there. Ah.
Well. Do you know the other two that were
interviewed? Or does it matter?
One guy, he went with the National Resources
Planning Board. Pretty good boy. Uh-huh. The
other one I don't remember. Matter
of fact, they had a little job selling me to come
because I had gotten on a plane with a naval officer
that had apparently didn't like Corpus Christi
and gave me a pretty good unselling. But before the
day was over, of my interview,
they convinced me that there was a great challenge
here and that they wanted me. They paid my expenses
down here. One of the department store owners
brought me down.
I didn't decide for a week, but they called me every
day. And then I finally decided to come got
permission to be released by Bartholomew.
And this is the reason that I declared myself
disqualified to participate in the selection of a
firm because I didn't want my association to
affect it. Well, Bartholomew started out on the
plans. It was about a $100,000 contract. Big money
in those days. And that was a pretty good sized
contract for it. But considering what was
involved in it, I don't think it was too much.
Because Bartholomew went outside of his firm and
employed a number of other consultants. One of the
big problems, we had three major problems. One was
a water supply.
One was the problem of the
constricting bridge that we had at the entrance to
the channel. It restricted the flow of marine
traffic. It was a bottleneck for for both railroad
and vehicular traffic. So Bartholomew went
outside of his firm and got the most qualified
engineers in each of these fields that he could
find. He got W.W. Horner, who was then president of
the American Society of Civil Engineers, as his
engineer advisor on the water supply and the
airport. He got Sverdrup and Parcell, one of the
top bridge engineers in the United States, and
railroad engineers on the problem of the bridge.
No, Sverdrup, that's S-V-E-R-D-R-U-P? Yes,
Sverdrup and Parcell. And Parcell. Yeah, you can
see their ad in the paper. Well, Bartholomew went
about a very thorough study. about three years to
complete it. He started in 1950 and finished it in
1953. Now his technique, of course, is to take each
subject and
write a very thorough treatise on it, as much as
time and funds would permit. And he got out
separate reports on each subject. and including
in these subjects were
economic
background, population, land use, housing,
streets and highways, transportation,
transit,
parking, schools and parks, public buildings,
water supply, storm drainage, public works, and
administration. Now, each of these subjects had a
separate and pretty good sized report, which were
circulated to an extensive citizens committee
that included several hundred citizens that were
appointed by the Area Development Committee.
And they were,
they were presumably the leading citizens on the
various subjects that they were interested in,
that knew and had some knowledge. So immediately,
A big citizen support was engendered.
And all these were leaders, too. So each one of
these reports was very thoroughly examined,
several of them rewritten.
And finally, they were in such a shape that all the
citizens were satisfied. They were then
submitted to the Area Development Committee,
which eventually approved them. And then they
authorized the publication of the summary, which
is this volume here, which was called the
Comprehensive Plan. Now, of course, anybody can
make a plan. Any planner can make a plan. He can
arrange the streets and the parks in
good order. But it's quite another thing to also
plan to implement it and figure out how to pay for it
and keep it within scale, the ability of the
community to pay for it. And this was part of the
assignment. And one of the reasons that the plan
was very successful was
this phase of it. They not only suggested what they
needed, but how they could pay for it.
For instance, when the bridge was built, and we
call it the Railroad Relocation Project, or the
The elimination of the Bascule Bridge bottleneck
is what was known locally, and we dubbed it the
Bascule Bottleneck Project.
We got involved there with the federal government
through the Truman Hobbs Act. It took some
research to find out that there was funds
available for the relocation of a bridge due to the
needs of navigation. We got the Highway
Department involved for building the high
bridge. And so altogether, we had the federal
government
primarily on the Truman Hobbs and the relocation
of the ship channel. That's a relocation of the
bridge. We had the Highway Department on the high
bridge and the connections to it. which
eventually expanded into a freeway system for the
city. We had the city and the county and the
navigation district involved, each with a share
in the cost of it. And it was divided according to
their legal authority to do certain phases of
this. So we had a very complicated formula on the
financing of it. But we knew before we started we
could finance it. We also had four railroads that
were competing railroads. And they weren't
speaking to each other. And we had to get their
total cooperation in order to make this work.
I'm going back now to one other thing. In this area
development committee, We had the
president of the Chamber of Commerce I mentioned
was Guy Warren. And he had the good sense to appoint
the president of the power company.